Constructor Theory of Information
David Deutsch1 & Chiara Marletto2
	  
1Centre for Quantum Computation, The Clarendon Laboratory,
University of Oxford
2Materials Department, University of Oxford

July 2014

We present a theory of information expressed solely in terms of which
transformations of physical systems are possible and which are impossible –
i.e. in constructor-theoretic terms. Although it includes conjectured laws of
physics that are directly about information, independently of the details of
particular physical instantiations, it does not regard information as an a priori
mathematical or logical concept, but as something whose nature and
properties are determined by the laws of physics alone. It does not suffer from
the circularity at the foundations of existing information theory (namely that
information and distinguishability are each defined in terms of the other). It
explains the relationship between classical and quantum information, and
reveals the single, constructor-theoretic property underlying the most
distinctive phenomena associated with the latter, including the lack of inprinciple distinguishability of some states, the impossibility of cloning, the
existence of pairs of variables that cannot simultaneously have sharp values,
the fact that measurement processes can be both deterministic and
unpredictable, the irreducible perturbation caused by measurement, and
entanglement (locally inaccessible information).

1 Introduction
In some respects, information is a qualitatively different sort of entity from all others in
terms of which the physical sciences describe the world. It is not, for instance, a function
only of tensor fields on spacetime (as general relativity requires all physical quantities to
be), nor is it a quantum-mechanical observable.
But in other respects, information does resemble some entities that appear in laws of
physics: the theory of computation, and statistical mechanics, seem to refer directly to it
without regard to the specific media in which it is instantiated, just as conservation laws
do for the electromagnetic four-current or the energy-momentum tensor. We call that the
substrate-independence of information. Information can also be moved from one type of
1

medium to another while retaining all its properties qua information. We call this its
interoperability property; it is what makes human capabilities such as language and science
possible, as well as biological adaptations that use symbolic codes, such as the genetic
code.
Also, information is of the essence in preparation and measurement, both of which are
necessary for testing scientific theories. The output of a measurement is information; the
input of a preparation includes information, specifying an attribute with which a physical
system is to be prepared.
All these applications of information involve abstraction, in that one entity is represented
symbolically by another. But information is not abstract in the same sense as, say, the set
of all prime numbers, for it only exists when it is physically instantiated. So the laws
governing it, like those governing computation – but unlike those governing prime
numbers – are laws of physics. In this paper we conjecture what these laws are.
Also, despite being physical, information has a counter-factual character: an object in a
particular physical state cannot be said to carry information unless it could have been in a
different state. As Weaver (1949) put it,
this word ‘information’ in communication theory relates not so much to what
you do say, as to what you could say….
The classical theory of information (Shannon 1948) was indeed developed to analyse the
physics of communication, where the objective is for a receiver to receive a message from a
transmitter through a medium. The receiver, transmitter and medium are physical systems,
but the message is not. It is information, initially instantiated in the transmitter, then in the
medium, then in the receiver. The overall process constitutes a measurement of one of the
transmitter’s physical variables, representing the message. Essential to Shannon’s notion
of communication is that a message is one of at least two possible messages, which are
distinguishable by measurement, and that the receiver is able to re-transmit the information
2

to a further receiver while retaining an instance of it. That requires a non-perturbing
measurement at some stage in the process.
Much of Shannon’s theory is about unreliable transmission and measurement, and
inefficient representations, and how to compose them into more reliable and efficient ones.
But here we are concerned with the fundamental issues that remain even in the limiting
case when all error rates have been reduced to their physically possible minima and there
is no redundancy in the message being transmitted. In that limit, receiving the message
only means distinguishing it from all the other possible messages. And in that regard,
Shannon’s theory is inadequate in two ways.
The first is that it cannot describe information in quantum physics, because certain
prohibitions that quantum theory imposes – such as the impossibility of cloning – violate
the kind of interoperability that is assumed in Shannon’s theory. Consequently the type of
information studied by Shannon is now called classical information.
The second is that Shannon’s theory is about information represented in distinguishable
states, but does not specify what distinguishing consists of physically. So, consider the
non-perturbing measurement that distinguishes two possible messages x and y. It has the
following effects in those two cases:
message

receiver

x

x0

y

x0

message

receiver

→

x

x

→

y

y

(1)

where x0 is a receptive state of some medium capable of instantiating the outcome x or y.
But this does not in fact distinguish message x from message y unless the receiver states x
and y are themselves distinguishable. Therefore (1), considered as a definition of
distinguishability, would be circular. Indeed, no existing theory of information provides a
non-circular account of what it means for a set of physical states to be mutually
distinguishable. The theory that we shall present here does (Section 4).
3

Likewise quantum information theory, as it stands, never gets round to specifying what it
is referring to as ‘quantum information’, nor its relation to classical information. It is not,
despite the name, a theory of a new type of information, but only a collection of quantum
phenomena that violate the laws of classical information. A new theory of information is
needed, within physics but at a deeper level than both quantum theory and Shannon’s
theory. In this paper we provide that, via constructor theory (Deutsch 2013).
Previous attempts to incorporate information at a fundamental level into physics (e.g.
Wheeler 1989), or at least into quantum theory (Wootters 1981, Hardy 2001, Clifton et al.
2003), have regarded information as being an a priori mathematical or logical concept. Our
approach is the opposite, namely that the nature and laws of information follow entirely
from those of physics; we are not trying to derive quantum theory from anything. In the
theory we present here, the status of information in physics is analogous to that of (say)
energy: given the laws of motion of physical objects, neither the concept of energy nor the
conservation law for the energy-momentum tensor are necessary for making any
prediction from initial data, yet our understanding of the physical world would be
radically incomplete without them. The conservation law explains some aspects of motion
as consequences of a deeper regularity in nature – which is why we expect as-yetundiscovered laws of motion to conserve the energy-momentum tensor too; but we don’t
expect to derive new laws of motion from it. It is a principle – a law of physics that
constrains other laws rather than the behaviour of physical objects directly.
After setting out as much of constructor theory as we shall need (Section 2), we shall begin
our search for a deeper theory of information by expressing, in exact, constructor-theoretic
terms, the concepts of computation, measurement and classical information that are
already assumed, informally, to be instantiated in the physical world (Sections 3-5). Then,
in Section 6, we express the regularities that are informally associated with classical
information as exact, purely constructor-theoretic principles of physics – which turn out to
4

be elegant and natural. In particular, we express prediction and testing in constructortheoretic terms. In Section 7 we introduce superinformation media as information media on
which certain tasks, with a natural constructor-theoretic definition, are impossible. In
Section 8 we show that the most distinctive qualitative features of quantum information
follow from the impossibility of those tasks. In other words, quantum information is an
instance of superinformation.

2 Constructor Theory
The laws of constructor theory are all principles, which we conjecture are obeyed by all
other laws of physics, so we shall call theories describing those, subsidiary theories.
Principles, being laws about other laws, do not make direct assertions about the outcomes
of measurements. They are nevertheless experimentally testable: a principle P is refuted if
some law violating P survives experimental tests while all rival laws conforming to P are
refuted1.
The basic principle of constructor theory is that
I. All other laws of physics are expressible entirely in terms of statements
about which physical transformations are possible and which are
impossible, and why.
This is in contrast with the prevailing conception of fundamental physics, which seeks to
explain the world in terms of initial conditions and laws of motion, and whose basic
dichotomy is therefore between what happens and what does not.
Unlike Shannon’s theory, constructor information theory makes no mention of probability.
Indeed, principle I rules out any reference to probability in fundamental laws of physics.
So all ‘generalised probabilistic theories’ (e.g, Barrett 2007), in which probabilities
1

For example, early observations of beta decay satisfied the principle of the conservation of energy under
the assumption that neutrinos were emitted, but violated it under the assumption that no undetected particle
was emitted. The conservation law would have been refuted if the neutrino theory had failed experimental
tests while some testable explanation predicting the destruction of energy survived. The supposed principle
of parity invariance was refuted in just that way.
5

interpolate between possible and impossible (or between happening and not happening),
can at most be descriptions at an emergent level. For a discussion of the emergence of
probability in deterministic quantum theory, see Deutsch (1999) and Wallace (2003).
Constructor theory describes the world in terms of transformations involving two kinds of
systems, playing different roles. One is the object causing the transformation, which we
refer to as the constructor, and whose defining characteristic is that it remains unchanged
in its ability to cause the transformation again. The other is the system being transformed,
which may consist of one or more subsystems, the substrates:
Constructor
Input!attributes!of!substrates ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→ Output!attributes!of!substrates ,
!

(2)

where the constructor and the substrates jointly are isolated.
By ‘attribute’ we mean anything about the substrate that can possibly be changed by a
physical process. We represent it formally as the set of states in which the substrate has
that attribute.
An intrinsic attribute of a substrate is one that does not refer to any other specific substrate.
For example, the distance x if an object !S1 from another object !S2 is an intrinsic attribute
of the combined system S1 ⊕ S2 but not of either !S1 or !S2 . In quantum theory, ‘entangled
!
with each other’ is a possible intrinsic attribute of a pair of qubits; having a particular
density operator is an intrinsic attribute of a system, while the rest of its quantum state
(see below) describes entanglement relationships with other systems.
Any set of disjoint attributes, we shall call a physical variable. Whenever a substrate is in a
state with attribute x ∈X where X is a variable, X is sharp, with the value x.
That individual physical systems (and not just the entire physical world) have states,
attributes and variables in this sense is guaranteed by Einstein’s (1949) principle of locality
(Einstein 1949), which has a precise expression in constructor-theoretic form:
6

II. There exists a mode of description such that the state of the combined
system S1 ⊕ S2 of any two substrates !S1 and !S2 is the ordered pair (x,y) of
!
!
the states x of !S1 and y of !S2 , and any construction undergone by !S1 and
not !S2 can change only x and not y.
In quantum theory, the Heisenberg picture is such a mode of description (see Deutsch &
Hayden 2000)1. Principle II rules out, for example, non-linear modifications of the
Schrödinger equation.
The basic entities of constructor theory are specifications of only the input-output pairs in
(2), with the constructor abstracted away:

→ Output!attributes!of!substrates .
!Input!attributes!of!substrates ⎯⎯
We call these construction tasks, or tasks for short. In general, a task A is a set of ordered
pairs of intrinsic attributes of some substrates:
A = {x1 → y1 , x2 → y2 ,...} .
!

We call the { xi } = In( A ) the legitimate input attributes of A and the { yi } = Out( A ) its
!

legitimate output attributes. The transpose of a task

{

}

{

!

}

A = x1 → y1 , x2 → y2 ,...
!

is

A ~ = y1 → x1 , y2 → x2 ,... .
!

A constructor is capable of performing a task A if, whenever presented with substrates
having an attribute in In( A ) , it delivers them with one of the corresponding attributes

!

from Out( A ) (regardless of what it does if the substrate is in any other state).

!

Tasks may be composed into networks to form other tasks, as follows. The parallel
composition A ⊗ B of two tasks A and B is the task whose net effect on a composite
system !M ⊕ N is that of performing A on M and B on N. When Out ( A ) = In ( B ) , the
serial composition BA is the task whose net effect is that of performing A and then B on

1

Note that the local states (in our sense) of a system S in the Heisenberg picture are the observables of S; the
global ‘state vector’ in unchangeable. So the controversy about whether the locality of quantum physics
conceals residual ‘non-locality’ (Wallace & Timpson 2007, Deutsch 2012) is not relevant here because
principle II only requires changeable quantities to be local.
7

the same substrate.	   A regular network of tasks is a network without loops whose nodes are
tasks and whose lines are their substrates, where the legitimate input states at the end of
each line are the legitimate output states at its beginning. Loops are excluded because a
substrate on a loop is a constructor.
It may be that a task

{(x, z) → (y,w)} cannot be decomposed into !{x → y} ⊗ {z → w}

!

because the individual attributes are not intrinsic and therefore the operands of that
parallel composition are not valid tasks. However, if
valid tasks, then !{ z → w} must be too.	  

{(x, z) → (y,w)} and !{x → y} are

!

No perfect constructors exist in nature. Approximations to them, such as catalysts or
robots, have non-zero error rates and also deteriorate with repeated use. But we call a task
A possible (which we write as A ✓ ) if the laws of nature impose no limit, short of

perfection, on how accurately A could be performed, nor on how well things that are
capable of approximately performing it could retain their ability to do so again. Otherwise
A is impossible (which we write as A ✘ ).

Accordingly we must also understand the principle I as requiring subsidiary theories to
provide a measure of the accuracy with which any approximate constructor they describe
performs tasks (including its own maintenance); and provide a meaning to whether an
infinite sequence of tasks A1 , A 2 ,… on a system S ⊕ E (where E might be the environment
of S) converges to a limiting task A on S alone.
A constructor-theoretic statement is one that refers only to substrates and which tasks on
them are possible or impossible – not to constructors. Constructor theory is the theory that
the (other) laws of physics can be expressed without referring explicitly to constructors.
A task refers to an isolated system of constructor and substrates. But we are also often
interested in what is possible or impossible regardless of the resources required. A task A

8

is possible with side-effects, which we write as A ✓ , if ( A ⊗ T)✓ for some task T on some
!
generic, naturally occurring substrate (see Section 6).

3 Computation
Our theory of information rests on first understanding computation in constructor-theoretic
terms. This will allow us to express information in terms of computation; not vice-versa as
is usually done. This is the key to avoiding the circularity at the foundations of
information theory that we described in Section 1.
A reversible computation CΠ (S ) is the task of performing a permutation Π over some set S
of at least two possible attributes of some substrate:
CΠ (S ) = ∪ {x → Π(x)} .
x∈S

For example, swapping two pure quantum states constitutes a reversible computation,
and may be a possible task even if they are not orthogonal. It is then natural to define a
computation variable as a set S of two or more possible attributes for which CΠ✓ for all
permutations Π over S, and a computation medium as a substrate with at least one
computation variable. (Since side-effects are allowed in the performance of CΠ , this
definition does not require physical processes to be reversible.)
Note again that in this paper we are not taking computation to be an a priori concept and
seeking necessary and sufficient conditions for a physical process to instantiate it (cf.
Horseman et al. 2014). We are conjecturing laws of physics: objective regularities in nature.
These happen to be conveniently expressed in terms of the tasks we have called
‘computations’ and the property that we shall call ‘information’. We think that these
correspond reasonably closely to the intuitive concepts with those names, but our claims
in no way depend on that being so.

9

4 Information
As we mentioned in Section 1 the intuitive concept of information is associated with that
of copying. We shall express this association exactly and without circularity, in terms of
computations as defined in Section 3.
We first consider computations involving two instances of the same substrate S. The
cloning task for a set S of possible attributes of S is the task

( )

{( ) ( )}

RS x0 = ∪ x,x0 → x,x
x∈S
!

(3)

on !S ⊕ S , where x0 is some attribute with which it is possible to prepare S from generic,
!
naturally occurring resources (Section 6 below). This is a generalisation of the usual notion
of cloning, which is (3) with S as the set of all attributes of S. A set S is clonable if RS ( x0 )✓
!
for some such x0 .
!
An information variable is a clonable computation variable. It is then natural to define an
information attribute as one that is a member of an information variable, and an information
medium as a substrate that has at least one information variable.
Also, a substrate S instantiates classical information if some information variable S of S is
sharp, and if giving it any of the other attributes in S was possible. And the classical
information capacity of S is the logarithm of the cardinality of its largest information
variable. The principle of locality II implies the convenient property that the combined
classical information capacity of disjoint substrates is the sum of their capacities.
Thus we have provided the purely constructor-theoretic notion of classical information
that we promised. But we have emancipated it from its dependence on classical physics,
and cured its circularity.

10

5 Measurement
We can now do the same for distinguishability and measurement. A set X of possible
attributes of a substrate S is distinguishable if	  

{

}

⎛
⎞✓
x
→
ψ
x ⎟ ,
⎜⎝ ∪
⎠
x∈X
!

(4)

where the {ψ x } constitute an information variable. Since ‘information variable’ is defined
!
above without reference to distinguishability, this definition is, as promised, not circular.
If a pair of attributes { x, y} is distinguishable we shall write x ⊥ y (and x ⊥ y if not).
If the original substrate continues to exist and the process (4) stores its result in a second,
output substrate (which must therefore be an information medium), (4) is the condition for
the input variable X to be measurable:
⎛
⎞✓
x,
x
→
y
,‘x’
(
)
(
)
0
x
∪
⎜⎝
⎟⎠ ,
x∈X

{

}

(5)

where the output substrate is initially prepared with a ‘receptive’ attribute x0 . When X is
sharp, the output substrate ends up with an information attribute ‘x’ of an output variable,
which represents the abstract outcome «it was x». (We give quoted labels such as ‘x’ to
attributes in the output variable corresponding to those in X.) Thus, measurement is like
cloning a variable (3) except that the output substrate is an information medium rather
than a second instance of the cloned substrate.
A constructor is a measurer of X if there is some choice of its output variable, labelling, and
receptive state, under which it is capable of performing (5). Consequently a measurer of X
is automatically a measurer of a range of other variables because one can interpret it as
such by re-labelling its outputs. (Such re-labellings must be possible tasks because they are
classical computations on a finite set – see Section 6.) For example, a measurer of X

11

measures any subset of X, or any coarsening of X (a variable whose members are unions of
attributes in X).
If yx ⊆ x in (5), the measurement is non-perturbing, which is the type of measurement
typically needed in computation and communication. It follows from the definition of
information variables that the task of measuring them non-perturbatively is always
possible.

6 Conjectured principles of physics bearing on information
Crucially, the most important properties of information do not follow from the definitions
we have given. In this section we seek the constructor-theoretic principles of physics that
determine those properties. Of these, perhaps the most fundamental one cannot even be
stated in the prevailing conception of fundamental physics, but it has an elegant
expression in constructor theory. It is the interoperability principle:
III. The combination of two substrates with information variables S1 and S2 is
!
!
a substrate with information variable S1 × S2 ,
!
where × denotes the Cartesian product of sets. Note that this principle requires certain
interactions to exist in nature. For instance, it would rule out theories of dark matter in
which dark information media exist but interactions between the dark and normal sectors
do not allow information to be copied arbitrarily accurately between them.
Exploring the properties of distinguishability in more detail leads us to conjecture further
such principles. Suppose that all attributes in a variable X are pairwise distinguishable –
i.e. ( ∀x ∈X,∀y ∈X, x ≠ y ) x ⊥ y . It does not follow logically from the definitions that X is a
distinguishable variable. But we conjecture that in physical reality, it always is. That is
because we expect that whenever there is a regularity among observable phenomena in a
substrate (such as a set of its attributes being pairwise distinguishable), that is always
because the phenomena are related by a unifying explanation – in this case, that they can
12

all be distinguished by measuring some variable. This, too, has an elegant statement as a
purely constructor-theoretic principle:
IV. If every pair of attributes in a variable X is distinguishable, then so is X.
And similarly:
V. If every state with attribute y is distinguishable from an attribute x, then so
is y.
Though we conjecture that IV and V hold universally in nature, none of our conclusions in
Section 8 depends on their being universal. It would suffice if they held only for a special
class of substrates. The same also holds for the remaining conjectured principles (VI-VIII).
Two of these could be considered simplifying assumptions rather than grand conjectures
about the nature of reality. But they might well be true, and are certainly good
approximations for present purposes: First, since we are concerned with the nature and
properties of information, not its long-term future, we assume that unlimited resources are
available for conversion into information storage devices. In constructor-theoretic terms
we express this as:
VI. Any number of instances of any information medium, with any one of its
information-instantiating attributes, is preparable from naturally occurring
substrates.
We call such substrates, which must therefore exist in unlimited numbers, ‘generic
resources’. In describing a task, we use the symbol g to represent a suitable generic
resource or resources for the task. Thus for every task A , we have A ✓ ⇒ { g → C A } ,
✓
!"

where ‘ ⇒ ’ denotes implication and C A is some constructor for A . The assumption VI
implies that there are generic (approximations to) constructors in nature too. Thus we also

(

)

have A ✓!" ⇔ ( ∃h ) A × { g → h} .
✓

13

And finally we assume that unlimited resources are available for information processing
too. We express this in constructor-theoretic terms as the conjectured composition principle
(Deutsch 2013):
VII. Every regular network of possible tasks is a possible task,
though here we need only assume that it holds for information-processing tasks.
Provided that information exists at all, principles III, VI and VII imply that for every
function f from a finite set of integers to itself, the task of computing f is possible.
Measurement of non-sharp variables

We have defined measurement of a variable X by the measurer’s effect (5) when X is
sharp. When we refer to a ‘sharp’ output we shall mean that the output variable is sharp.
But the term ‘measurement’ is also used to describe cases where X is not sharp. In such
cases the output variable need not be sharp either. Exploring these will lead us to another
constructor-theoretic principle about information.
We first define a convenient tool, the bar operation: let x be any attribute; x (‘x-bar’) is the
union of all attributes (i.e. the set of all states) that are distinguishable from x. If X is a
variable, Principle IV allows us to assign the natural meaning X ≡ ∪ x∈X x . (Thus any
expression topped by a bar denotes an attribute.) When X is empty, we call X a maximal
variable.
The bar operation has the property x ≡ x . For we have x ⊆ x (since distinguishability is
symmetric), i.e. x = x ∪ y for some y. Similarly, x = x ∪ z for some z that does not overlap
with x . Since, by definition, z contains only states distinguishable from x ; and since
x ⊆ x , each such state is also distinguishable from x. Hence z is empty and x ≡ x .

14

Any variable of the form { x, x } we shall call a Boolean variable. Principle IV and the
definition of bar trivially imply that every Boolean variable is distinguishable1. Also, every
Boolean variable is maximal, since no attribute y can be distinguishable from both x and x ,
for if y ⊥ x , we would have y ⊆ x and hence y ⊥ x .
Now consider an attribute {a} in which X is non-sharp. A trivial case is when {a} ⊆ X ; in
that case, by principle IV, there is a distinguishable variable that includes X that is sharp.
But suppose instead that {a} ⊆ X , so that {a} ⊄ X (which includes all cases when X
maximal, because then X includes all states). Whether it is then still possible for X not to
be sharp in the state a, and what it means if that is so, is up to the subsidiary theories. (For
instance, in quantum theory it would mean that a was a superposition or mixture of the
states with attributes in X. The generalisation of this to constructor theory will be
discussed in Section 8.5.) But it must at least imply that the output variable of every
measurer of X is either non-sharp, or sharp with some value ‘x’ where x ∈X . That means
that the measurer could mistake the attribute {a} for one having an attribute in X. For if
some measurer of X could not make such a mistake, it could distinguish {a} from all
attributes in X, contradicting {a} ⊄ X .
Consider the case when a particular measurer of X is presented with {a} ⊆ X and the
output variable is sharp with, say, the value ‘x’. That means that that measurer can
mistake {a} for only one attribute in X, namely x. Thus it is also a measurer of another
variable, namely the variant of X with the attribute x replaced by x ∪ {a} . Similarly we can
construct a variable Z by augmenting each attribute x ∈X with all the states a ∈X that can
be mistaken only for x by that measurer. Thus we see that the measurer was really a
measurer of Z all along, with the additional property that whenever it produces any sharp
output ‘z’ on measuring its substrate, the input substrate really had the attribute z. It is
For the sake of uniformity of notation we include cases where x is empty, even though { x, x } is not
literally variable in those cases. But since the empty set is an attribute that no substrate can possibly have,
every state is distinguishable from it; hence in such cases x is the set of all states. A trivial constructor that
produces a fixed result, which can then be labelled ‘x’ in (5) then qualifies as a distinguisher of { x, x } .
15
1

logically possible that applying this procedure for some other measurer of X would yield a
different Z. But we propose the following principle of the consistency of measurement:
VIII. Whenever a measurer of a variable X would produce a sharp output when
presented with the attribute {a} ⊆ X , all other measurers of X would too1.
Consequently those other measurers of X would have to produce the same sharp output

‘x’ for the given input {a} ⊆ X . For suppose one of them produced an output ‘x’ for that
input. That would make { a} distinguishable from all attributes in X other than x .
Likewise if another produced a different sharp output ‘x ′ ’ . So then { a} would be
distinguishable from all x ∈X , and would therefore (from IV) be included in X and
hence not in X , which is a contradiction.
Thus, principle VIII implies that for any measurable variable X there is a unique variable
Z such that all measurers of X are measurers of Z. Z therefore has the property that
whenever a measurer of Z produces a sharp output ‘z’ the input substrate really has the
attribute z. We shall call such variables observables, and information observables if they are
information variables. (Quantum-mechanical observables, in the Heisenberg picture, are
indeed observables by this definition.) Properties of observables are crucial to our results
about superinformation (Section 8).
Properties of observables

We now obtain a necessary and sufficient condition for a variable to be an observable.
Consider any attribute x, and any measurable variable X of which it is a member. Now let

χ be the union of all attributes in X, and consider the variable X ′ = { x, χ − x} , a coarsening
of X. It must be measurable since any measurer of { x, x } measures it. In this section and in
Section 8.5 we shall repeatedly rely on the relations between measurers of X, X ′ , and the
two Boolean variables { x, x } and { x , x } , which are represented in Fig. 1.

1

Despite mentioning constructors (measurers) explicitly, VIII is a purely constructor-theoretic statement, for
it could be rephrased as ‘if the task of measuring X while producing an output ‘x’ (x∈X) for an input {a} ⊆ X
is possible, the task of measuring X while not producing that output for the input {a} is impossible’.
16

Measurers of X’!

Measurers of !{ x, x }

Measurers of X !
Measurers of {! x, x }

Fig. 1 Hierarchy of measurers of variables of which x is a member.

First we prove that all such measurers must produce a sharp ‘x’ when presented with a
substrate with the attribute {a} ⊆ x . By VIII, every measurer of { x, x } must deliver a
sharp output ‘x’ for any input {a} ⊆ x , since all measurers of { x , x } are measurers of

{x, x } and would deliver a sharp ‘x’ , which could be reinterpreted as ‘x’. Any measurer
of { x, x } measures X’, and since the former produces a sharp output x when presented
with {a} ⊆ x , by principle VIII, so do all measurers of X ′ . Also, any measurer of X is a
measurer of X ′ . Therefore, in particular, any measurer of X must give a sharp output ‘x’,
when presented with any input {a} ⊆ x .
The converse is also true: if any measurer of a variable X (containing x) produces a sharp
‘x’ when presented with a state {a} ⊆ X , then {a} ⊆ x . For suppose that given {a} ∈X , a
measurer of X produces a sharp outcome ‘x’. Then, all of them produce a sharp ‘x’, by
VIII. Again, any measurer of X is a measurer of X ′ ; therefore, by VIII, all measurers of X ′
must give the same sharp output ‘x’ when presented with {a} ⊆ X . By definition of x , any
measurer of { x, x } is a measurer of X ′ . Therefore, again by VIII, all measurers of { x, x }
must give the sharp output ‘x’ when presented with {a} ∈X . This implies that {a} ⊥ x , i.e.,
{a} ⊆ x .

This elucidates the physical meaning of x : it is the set of all states a such that, for any
variable X containing the attribute x, a measurer of X produces a sharp output ‘x’ when
presented with a substrate with the attribute {a} ⊆ X . And it also provides our necessary

17

and sufficient condition for a variable to be an observable, namely: all its attributes x
satisfy x = x .
Prediction, testing and ensembles

Under constructor theory, a testable prediction is a statement that the output variable of a
certain possible measurement will be sharp, with a certain value. That requirement of
sharpness does not come from constructor theory. It is entailed by the logic of testability,
and is why probabilistic predictions have to be tested by repeated measurements. For
example, consider the testing of a fundamentally stochastic (and therefore incompatible
with constructor theory) law of motion, which predicts the probability of an outcome of a
measurement but not the outcome. Since probabilities of individual outcomes are not
measurable on individual systems, such a prediction can be tested only if it is interpreted
as a manner of speaking about non-probabilistic predictions about measurements on
ensembles, which can then be approximated by average results of finite sets of
measurements on individual systems.
Likewise, the constructor theory of measurement and testing must concern itself with how
to obtain sharp outputs in situations where the individual outputs of measurements are
not sharp, either because a subsidiary theory predicts that, or at a practical level because
perfectly accurate measurers do not exist. And again, most methods of doing that involve
using multiple instances of a given substrate.
instances
n

We denote by S a physical system S ⊕ S ⊕…S consisting of n instances of S, and we
n
terms


(n)
n
denote by x
the attribute ( x, x,…x ) of S( ) . Evidently the set x(n) x ∈S is an

(n)

{

}

information variable of S( ) whenever S is an information variable of S. And each x( ) is a
n

n

redundant instantiation of the information x.
If, in conventional, probabilistic, information theory, S is a discrete set and each instance of
S has a probability p < 12 of having been changed from the correct value x by uncorrelated
perturbations, the probability that a plurality of the values stored in n instances will not
18

instantiate x falls exponentially with n. Although probabilities are not allowed at the
fundamental level in constructor theory, redundancy can still play effectively the same
role, in following way. Denote by S( ) an unlimited supply of instances of S. Suppose that
∞

they all have the same intrinsic, preparable attribute, either x or y, and let us call a
sequence of experiments on S( ) , as n increases without limit, an ‘experiment on an
n

ensemble S( ) ’. Recall from Section 2 that a possible task is one for which the laws of
∞

nature impose no limit, short of perfection, on how well the task can be performed. Since
our assumption VI implies that there is no limit on n, it follows that for any two intrinsic
∞
attributes x and y of a substrate S, x( ) and y( ) are either interchangeable in all

∞

(∞)

experiments on S

(using generic resources), or distinguishable. For given such a supply,

performing all possible experiments on (instances of) S, infinitely often, is a possible task.
So if that cannot tell the difference between x( ) and y( ) , nothing (that uses only generic
∞

∞

resources) can. If something can, we call x and y ensemble distinguishable. Thus we propose
the principle:
IX. Any two disjoint, intrinsic attributes are ensemble distinguishable.

7 Superinformation
So far in this paper we have proposed a set of purely constructor-theoretic principles that
capture in an exact, subsidiary-theory-independent way the behaviour of ‘classical’
information. From here on, we propose no further principles. We investigate what
happens if the subsidiary theories impose a single further prohibition on what tasks are
possible. This turns out to allow substrates to instantiate what we call superinformation, and
we shall show that quantum information is an instance of it.
It follows from our theory so far that every subset with at least two members of an
information observable S, is also an information observable. But the converse does not
hold: the union of two information observables, even if their attributes are mutually

19

disjoint, is not necessarily an information observable. It is through that loophole that all
the non-classical content of constructor information theory flows.
A superinformation medium M is an information medium with at least two information
observables that contain only mutually disjoint attributes and whose union is not an
information observable. For example, in quantum physics any set of two orthogonal states
of a qubit constitutes an information observable, but no union of two or more such sets
does: its members are not all distinguishable. M instantiates superinformation if it has one
of the attributes in S but could have had any of the others. A supercomputation is a task that
maps S to itself.

8 Properties of superinformation
In what follows, let S be a superinformation medium and let X and Y be two of its
information observables whose union X ∪ Y consists of mutually disjoint attributes but is
not an information observable. (Hence X ∪ Y is not even an information variable.)
8.1 Not all information attributes of a superinformation medium are distinguishable

There must exist information attributes x ∈ X and y ∈Y such that x ⊥ y . For suppose that

x ⊥ y for all x ∈ X and y ∈Y . This would imply that all attributes in X ∪ Y are pairwise
distinguishable and hence, from principle IV, that X ∪ Y is a measurable variable. Each
attribute in X ∪ Y is also preparable, since by VI that is true of X and Y separately. It
would follow that all permutations on X ∪ Y are possible tasks. For, to perform Π , given
S with any attribute z ∈ X  Y , one would first measure which attribute that is, thereby
preparing some information medium with the information attribute ‘z’. Then one would
compute Π(‘z’) on that medium (which must be possible because it is a computation
medium). Then one would use that result to prepare, from generic substrates, another
instance of S with the attribute Π ( z ) , which again must be possible by principle VI.
The remaining condition for X ∪ Y to be an information variable would be met too: the
cloning task is possible (with side-effects). For if X ∪ Y is a distinguishable set of S ,
20

( X  Y ) × ( X  Y ) is a distinguishable set of S ⊕ S : one can distinguish its members by

performing a distinguishing operation on each instance of S in parallel and then
combining the sharp outputs with a logical-or operation. Moreover, X × X , X × Y , Y × X
and Y × Y , are all information variables of S ⊕ S , by the interoperability principle III.
Therefore each attribute in their union ( X  Y ) × ( X  Y ) is preparable. These two facts
imply, by the argument above, that all permutations of ( X  Y ) × ( X  Y ) are possible with
side-effects. Since those permutations include the cloning tasks on X ∪ Y , it follows that
X ∪ Y is an information variable, which contradicts the condition for S to be a

superinformation medium.
So there must exist a pair of attributes x ∈ X and y ∈Y of S that are not distinguishable.
8.2 Undetectability of sharpness

It is impossible to measure whether the observable X or Y is sharp. For it were possible,
that would also distinguish between the above-mentioned x and y. (Of course sharpness is
ensemble measurable, by IX, because none of the attributes in X intersects any attribute in
Y.)
8.3 Superinformation cannot be cloned

Suppose that the cloning task (3) were possible for the variable X ∪ Y . Then in particular,
any variable { x, y} with x ∈ X and y ∈ Y could be cloned. Then, given our generic

{ } it is possible to apply the cloning operation to the

resources assumption VII, if z ∈ x, y

substrate any number of times, and the output would be a composite medium S ⊕ S ⊕ S …
with the attribute ( z, z, z …) . Thus, preparing z (∞) would be a possible task. The attributes
x and y are intrinsic information attributes, so by assumption VI they are preparable, and
therefore by principle IX the two attributes z (∞) are ensemble distinguishable: x

(∞)

⊥ y(∞) .

{ }

Thus by preparing z (∞) from x, y one could distinguish x from y.

21

If all such pairs were clonable, it would follow that all attributes in X ∪ Y were pairwise
distinguishable, contrary to our result in 8.1, so the assumption that the superinformation
variable X  Y is clonable is false.
8.4 Pairs of observables not simultaneously preparable or measurable

The sets x  y are all empty by the defining property of a superinformation medium: So
when the substrate has any of the attributes y ∈Y , X cannot be sharp, and vice versa;
hence it is impossible to prepare S with its observables X and Y both sharp. For the same
reason, simultaneously measuring X and Y is impossible.
8.5 Unpredictability of deterministic processes

Superinformation

media

exhibit

the

counter-intuitive

property

of

evolving

deterministically yet unpredictably.
Unpredictability arises when a measurer of X acts when X is non-sharp. Suppose that X is
maximal, whereby y ⊆ X . If a substrate with attribute y is presented to a measurer of X,
the output variable cannot be sharp. For if it were, with value ‘x’, the properties of
observables (Section 6), would imply that y ⊆ x ; yet x and y are non-overlapping by
hypothesis. Thus, no prediction of the form «the outcome will be ‘x’», where x ∈X , can be
true, since that would imply that the measurer, when presented with y, produces a sharp
output. That already means that the outcome of a measurement of X, when the substrate
has the attribute y, is unpredictable. Remarkably, constructor information theory also
provides a definite physical meaning for this unpredictability, even though the relevant
subsidiary theories must give no meaning to probabilities.
As a guide to the general constructor-theoretic case, let us consider an example from
quantum theory. An observable such as X might be the number of photons in a cavity,
N̂ = 1 1 + 2 2 2 + 3 3 3 + … The only way that N̂ can fail to be sharp when the photon

field in the cavity has some attribute y is that y contains superpositions or mixtures of two
or more eigenstates of N̂ – let us say, those with eigenvalue less than 3. In such a case,
22

when N̂ is measured, no prediction of the form «the outcome will be ‘n’» (for some
eigenvalue n of N̂ ) would be true. But there are other predictions that must be true: any
pure state

ψ

in y has the property that the expectation value of the projector

0 0+1 1+ 2 2

ψ . Therefore, the prediction that a measurer of

is 1 in

0 0 + 1 1 + 2 2 would yield the outcome ‘1’, when presented with ψ would be true.
Thus, since 0 0 + 1 1 + 2 2 is a Boolean observable whose meaning is «whether there
are fewer than 3 photons in the cavity» (with 1 denoting yes and 0 no), the fact that the
outcome of a measurement of N̂ would be less than 3 is predictable, even though
predicting the outcome itself is an impossible task. This is the physical meaning of
unpredictability in the quantum case.
The same logic applies equally in constructor-theory, as we shall now explain, without the
apparatus of projectors, expectation values and probabilities.
Let χ again be the union of all attributes in X and χ y be the union of all attributes in X that
are not distinguishable from y. (By the defining properties of superinformation, there must
exist at least one such attribute.) Our goal is now to explain that the Boolean observable

{χ , χ } plays the same role as the above projector. We start by showing that it must be
y

y

sharp with value χ y when the substrate has the attribute y.
Consider any state a ∈y . Any measurer of the Boolean variable { χ − χ y , χ − χ y } , when
presented with a substrate with the attribute { a} , will produce a sharp output ‘χ − χ y ’
because y ⊥ χ − χ y (by definition of χ y ). Any measurer of { χ − χ y , χ − χ y } is also a measurer
of the (maximal) variable { χ − χ y , χ y } , (because χ y ⊆ χ − χ y ). Hence by principle VIII all
measurers of { χ y , χ − χ y } must give a sharp output ‘χ y ’ when presented with { a} ⊆ y . By
the properties of observables (Section 6), we conclude that { a} ⊆ χ y . Since this is true for
any state in y, it must be true of y too: y ⊆ χ y . Therefore, again by the result of Section 6,

{

}

when the attribute is y, χ y , χ y must be sharp with value χ y .

23

Consider now the observable X y = { x ∈X : x ⊥ y} (noting that χ y = X y ). First, it must
contain at least two attributes. For suppose all the attributes in X except x were
distinguishable from y. Then χ y = x , so that y would be included in x . But this is a
contradiction, because this would imply that y ⊆ x (since X is an observable).

{

}

We can now see why χ y , χ y generalises the projector in the quantum example. One way
of measuring { χ y , χ y } is to measure X first and then to perform a computation on the
output ‘x’ that would, if X were sharp in the input, determine whether x ∈X y or not. All
such measurers must, by the principle of consistency of measurement VIII, give a sharp

{

‘χ y ’ when presented with any attribute in χ y ; hence they are all measurers of χ y , χ y

{

}

}

too. Thus χ y , χ y is a Boolean observable whose meaning is «whether the outcome is one
of the ‘x’ with x ⊥ y ». Since y ⊆ χ y , that process, by principle VIII, must yield the same

{

sharp output ‘χ y ’ , meaning ‘yes’, as any other measurer of χ y , χ y

} does when presented

with y. As in the quantum case, this provides the physical meaning of unpredictability:
Any constructor (including any observer) that measures X on a substrate with attribute y
and then computes (or recollects) whether the outcome was one of the ‘x’ with x ⊥ y , by
the above procedure, will reach the conclusion ‘yes’ (corresponding to ‘χ y ’ ); And will
thereby have the same attribute as it would have if X had been sharp with some value

x ∈X y . Yet no prediction «the outcome will be ‘x’» with x ∈X will be true.
Again, it is up to the subsidiary theories to explain this deterministic unpredictability. In
Everettian quantum theory, the explanation is that the measurer differentiates, during the
measurement, into multiple instances, sharply agreeing that the output was one of the

x ∈X, x ⊥ y but not all perceiving the same one.
8.6 Irreducible perturbation of one observable caused by measuring another

The observable X y contains two or more attributes, none of which is distinguishable from
y nor overlaps with y. We shall now show that any measurer of X y must cause an
irreducible perturbation of the substrate for some input attributes. In particular:
24

⎛
⎜ ∪ ( x, x0 ) → ( x,‘x’)
⎝ x∈Xy

{

⎞
y,
x
→
y,
k
( 0) ( ) ⎟
⎠

} ∪ {

}

✘

(6)

for all x0 and k. In words: no device can both measure X y non-perturbatively if X y is
sharp and leave the substrate unperturbed if the input has attribute y. Moreover, the
perturbation is irreducible: nothing can subsequently undo it while leaving the outcome of
the measurement in any information variable, for if it could, the overall process would be
a counter-example to (6).
To prove (6), suppose that the task in (6) were possible. Since y is an information attribute
(hence, it is intrinsic) and x0 is preparable from generic resources, k would be an intrinsic
attribute because, by hypothesis, it could be produced from generic resources in the
combination ( y, k ) with the intrinsic attribute y.
Moreover, k would be disjoint from all the ‘x’. For suppose there were a state in k ∩ ‘x’ , for
some ‘x’. That would imply that there exists a state a in y with the property that {a}, when
presented to any measurer of X y , produced an output with value ‘x’. Thus, by the results
in Section 6, it would follow that {a} ⊆ x (because X y is an observable), but this is a
contradiction, as y does not intersect any x.
Therefore k would be ensemble distinguishable from x. Thereby it would be possible, by
performing the above task an unlimited number of times on the same instance of the
substrate together with successive instances of the target with attribute x0 , to produce an
ensemble with attribute k ( ∞) or ‘x’( ∞) , and so k would be distinguishable from ‘x’, and so y
would be distinguishable from x, contradicting the supposition.
8.7 Consistency of consecutive measurements of a non-sharp observable

In quantum theory, consecutive non-perturbing measurements of an observable, even if it
is not sharp, yield the same outcomes, in the sense that a measurement of whether they are
the same always yields the sharp outcome ‘true’. We now show that this also holds for
arbitrary subsidiary theories that conform to constructor theory.
25

A somewhat roundabout way of measuring the variable { χ y , χ y } of S is the following.
First, apply two non-perturbing measurers of X in succession to the substrate, recording
each output in one of two receptive information media M and M′ . Then present M to a
computer that performs

∪ { x → x} ∪

x∈X y

∪ {x → Π ( x )}

x∈( X−X y )

(7)

where Π is any permutation with no fixed point. (Here we have suppressed the quotation
marks to avoid clutter, replacing ‘x’ by x, writing X for the output variable of M, and X’ for
that of M’, and so on.) This leaves the attributes in X y (of M) unchanged and changes
those in X − X y (of M). Finally, present M, M′ and a third, receptive, information
medium R to a computer that performs

∪ {(v, w′ , x ) → (v, w′ , v = w′ ?)} .

v∈X , w ′∈X ′

0

(8)

The question mark means that when X of M and X ′ of M′ are sharp, the output
observable {‘true’,‘false’} of R indicates whether their values v and w ′ are equal or not.
Call the combined measurer that performs this overall process N. It is also a measurer of

{χ − χ , χ } because when S has attribute x ∈X , the output observable of R is sharp with
y

y

y

the value ‘true’, which can also be interpreted as ‘χ y ’ ; and similarly when S has attribute

x ∈X − X y , it is sharp with the value ‘false’, meaning ‘χ − χ y ’ . By principle VIII, N is also

{

}

a measurer of χ y , χ y .
Now suppose that N is presented with a substrate with the attribute y. Since y ⊆ χ y
(Section 8.5), by principle VIII the measurer N must deliver a sharp outcome ‘χ y ’ (i.e.
‘true’), which is the same as it would deliver if the outputs of the two consecutive
measurements of X were both sharp with the same value – even though, as we have seen,
neither of them can be sharp when y is the input, just as in quantum theory.

26

8.8 Quantisation

The states of a quantum system form a continuum, and their dynamical evolution is
continuous in both space and time. With hindsight we can now see that the ‘quantisation’
after which quantum theory is named really refers to a property of quantum information.
The discrete and the continuous are linked, in quantum theory, in a manner that was not
previously guessed at, but is easily understood in terms of constructor information theory:
each information observable of a quantum physical system has only a discrete set of
attributes, but there is a continuous infinity of such observables, no union of which is an
information observable. So in quantum physics, classical information is discrete, and
superinformation (quantum information) is continuous.
8.9 Coherence and locally inaccessible information

Another feature of quantum theory that is due to its permitting superinformation is the
distinction between coherent and incoherent processes. Let w be a set of states of a
superinformation medium M. A computation or supercomputation C on a proper subset
v of w is coherent with respect to w if it is possible to perform it reversibly on w. That is to
say, there exists a task A , with A ✓ and A ~✓ , whose legitimate input set contains w and
whose restriction to the subtask with legitimate input set v is C . M is a coherent medium
with respect to information variables {Si } of M if each permutation task on each Si can be
!
!
performed coherently with respect to the union of all the attributes in the {Si } .
!

For example, the qubits of a universal quantum computer constitute a coherent
superinformation medium, because they are a superinformation medium and all
reversible classical computations in some computation basis can be performed reversibly
on the set of all their pure states.
Quantum entanglement is an example of a phenomenon that depends on coherence. It is
usually characterised in terms of probabilistic quantities such as the correlations referred
to in Bell’s theorem. But underlying those quantitative measures is a qualitative property:

27

the presence of locally inaccessible information1 (Deutsch & Hayden 2000). In our
terminology, that means that some combined system S1 ⊕ S2 has information variables
that cannot be measured by measuring Cartesian products (nor subsets thereof) of
variables of S1 and S 2 .
So, let S1 be a superinformation medium, as in Section 7. Again let X be maximal.
Consider any twofold observable B1 = {0′ , 1′} ⊆ Y . We proved in Section 8.5 that for any
attribute y ∈Y there are at least two attributes in X which are not distinguishable from y.
Let A1 = {0,1} ⊆ X be the observable including two attributes that are not distinguishable
from 0’, and define A2 and B2 for S2 analogously. Now suppose that S1 ⊕ S2 is coherent
with respect to the variables { A1 × A2 ,B1 × A2 } . These are information observables, so that
in particular we have T where
✓

{

(1,0) → (1,1) , (0,1) → (0,1) , (1,1) → (1,0)} .

T = ( 0,0 ) → ( 0,0 ) ,

(9)

T is the controlled-not computation. The coherence condition implies that in addition,

( T ∪ T′ ) and ( T ∪ T′ )~ , where
✓

✓

{

(0′ ,1) → ψ ( ) , (1′ ,0) → ψ ( ) , (1′ ,1) → ψ ( ) } ,

T ′ = ( 0′ ,0 ) → ψ (1) ,

2

3

4

(10)

and ψ (1) …ψ ( 4 ) are four distinct states of S1 ⊕ S2 . Because of the principle of locality II,

(

)

these must have the ordered-pair form ψ (1) = a(1) , b(1) , etc., where a(1) …a( 4 ) are attributes
(not necessarily intrinsic) of S1 and b(1) …b( 4 ) of S2 .

{

} is an information variable. (Evidently one can

Now, C = ( 0,1) , (1,1) , ( 0′ ,0 ) , (1′ ,0 )

measure it by first measuring A2 and then either A1 or B1 according to the output of that
measurement, which is necessarily sharp.)
The effect of performing the task T ∪ T ′ on the substrate when C is sharp must be to

{

make the variable D = ( 0,1) , (1,0 ) , ψ (1) , ψ ( 3)
1

} sharp with the corresponding values under

Entanglement is not the only property of quantum information for which locally inaccessible information is
responsible. There is also the misleadingly named “non-locality without entanglement” of Bennett et al.
(1999).
28

(9) and (10). And D must also be an information variable because, by the coherence
property, ( T ∪ T ′ )~ is also possible.
Now consider the subset {( 0,1) , ψ (1) } of D. This is an information variable that cannot be
measured by measuring products of variables of S1 and S 2 . For if it could, then

( ) ( )
and hence that 0′ ⊥ 0 , contrary to construction. Similarly b ⊥ 1 ⇒ ψ ⊥ (1,1) ⇒
!
!
(0′ ,0) ⊥ (1,0) ⇒ 0′ ⊥ 1 , again contrary to construction.
!
( )

a ⊥ 0 or b1 ⊥ 1 . But if a1 ⊥ 0 then ψ 1 ⊥ 0,0 , which in turn would imply that 0′ ,0 ⊥ 0,0
!1
!
!
!
1

So the information variable

1

{(0,1) , ψ ( ) } holds locally inaccessible information, as
1

promised. Note that the failure of local distinguishability is possible because
superinformation media obey the principle of locality II, not disobey it as has been
supposed.

9 Concluding remarks
The constructor theory of information relies only on the fundamental constructor-theoretic
dichotomy between possible and impossible tasks. All its definitions and conjectured
principles are constructor-theoretic. It reconciles apparently contradictory features of
information: that of being an abstraction, yet governed by laws of physics; of being
physical, yet counter-factual. And it robustly unifies the theories of quantum and classical
information.

Acknowledgments
We thank Harvey Brown, Oscar Dahlsten and Alan Forrester for suggesting
improvements to earlier drafts of this paper. This work was supported by the Templeton
World Charity Foundation.

References
Barrett, J. (2007) Information Processing in Generalized Probabilistic Theories, Phys. Rev. A75
032304.
29

Bennett, C.H., DiVincenzo, D.P., Fuchs, C.A., Mor, T., Rains, E., Shor, P.W., Smolin, J.A. &
Wootters, W.K. (1999) Quantum nonlocality without entanglement, Phys. Rev. A59 2,
1070-91.
Clifton, R., Bub, J., & and Halvorson, H. (2003) Characterizing quantum theory in terms of
information-theoretic constraints, Found. Phys. 33 1561– 1591.
Deutsch, D. (1999) Quantum Theory of Probability and Decisions, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A455
3129–37.
Deutsch, D. (2012) Vindication of Quantum Locality Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A468 531-44.
Deutsch, D. (2013) Constructor Theory Synthese 190 18 4331-59.
Deutsch, D. & Hayden, P. (2000) Information Flow in Entangled Quantum Systems Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. A456 1759-74.
Einstein, A. (1949) quoted in Albert Einstein: Philosopher, Scientist, P.A. Schilpp, Ed., Library
of Living Philosophers, Evanston, 3rd edition (1970), p85.
Hardy, L. (2001) Quantum Theory from Five Reasonable Axioms quant-ph/0101012.
Horseman, C. , et al., (2014) When does a physical system compute?, Proc. R. Soc. A 470,
20140182
Shannon, C.E. (1948) A Mathematical Theory of Communication Bell System Technical Journal
27 379–423, 623–56.
Wallace, D. (2003) Everettian rationality: defending Deutsch’s approach to probability in the
Everett interpretation Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34 415–
39.
Wallace, D. & Timpson, C. J. (2007) Non-locality and gauge freedom in Deutsch and Hayden’s
formulation of quantum mechanics. Found. Phys. 37 951-5.
Weaver, W. (1949) in Shannon, C.E. & Weaver, W. The Mathematical Theory of
Communication Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Wheeler, J. A. (1989) Information, physics, quantum: the search for links Proceedings III
International Symposium on Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Tokyo, 354-68.
Wootters,W. (1981) Statistical Distance and Hilbert Space Phys. Rev. D23 357.

30

